---
date: 2020-01-19
title: 'How to create an API with Node and Express'
template: post
thumbnail: '../thumbnails/api.png'
slug: how-to-create-an-api-with-nodejs-and-express
categories:
  - Code
tags:
  - code
  - api
---

<!-- # Article content
* [ ] Introduction
* [ ] Content Summary
* [ ] How to create an API using NodeJS and Express
-->

## Starting a new project

The first thing I like to do is to create a brand new folder for the following project:

```bash
mkdir api
cd api
```

After that, we just need to start our node app. I prefer to use `yarn` instead of `npm` but you can choose whatever package manager you want.

```bash
yarn init -y
```

### Dependencies

Let's start with 2 important libraries: **Express** and **Body-Parser**.

**Express** is a minimal, flexible and open source Node.js web aplication framework that provides a very robust set of features for web and mobile apps. With Express we'll create
**routes** and handle **http requests**.

**Body-Parser** is a Node.js body parsing middleware that parses incoming http request bodies before your api handlers, giving you, for example, a JSON parsed request body for you to work with.

Now, just run the following command in the `terminal`:

```bash
yarn add express bodyparser
```

A **node_modules** folder will be created in the process. This folder is where Node.js put all the dependencies of the project. 

### Organizing

In order to separate your source code from these initial and autogenerated files, it's convenient to create a `src` folder to put all your code in. Let's take this chance to 
create our application entrypoint file `index.js` as well. In the terminal:

```bash
mkdir src
touch src/index.js
```

Let's change the **main** file of the project from `index.js` to `src/index.js` in the `package.json` file. The
`package.json` will be as follows:

```json
{ 
  "name": "api",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "main": "src/index.js",
  "license": "MIT",
  "dependencies": {
    "body-parser": "^1.19.0",
    "express": "^4.17.1"
  }
}
```

And we're all set!

## The API

To put together the **core** of our API you just need to:
- Import **express** and **bodyParser**;
- Instantiate the **express**;
- Create the jsonParser and urlencodedParser middlewares;
- Pass them to **express**;
- Finally, the app will listen to port 3000 (you can choose another one);

```javascript
const express = require('express')
const bodyParser = require('body-parser')

const app = express()

const jsonParser = bodyParser.json()
const urlencondedParser = bodyParser.urlencoded({extended: false})

app.use(jsonParser)
app.use(urlencondedParser)

// Routes
app.get('/', (request, response) => {
  response.send({message: 'Hello, world'})
})

app.listen(3000)
```

`bodyParser.json([options])` returns a middleware that only parses `json` and only looks at requests where the `Content-Type` header
matches the `type` option. By default the type is `application/json`.

`bodyParser.urlencoded([options])` returns a middleware that only parses `urlencoded` bodies and only looks at requests where 
the `Content-Type` header matches the `type` option. This parser accepts only UTF-8 enconding and, in our case, we used the option: `{extended: false}` to accept url-encoded data with the `querystring` library.

### Routes

An API without routes doesn't do anything. The **routes** are the endpoints that will respond to http requests. To create that you just need to:

```javascript
const express = require('express')
const bodyParser = require('body-parser')

const app = express()

const jsonParser = bodyParser.json()
const urlencondedParser = bodyParser.urlencoded({extended: false})

app.use(jsonParser)
app.use(urlencondedParser)

// Routes
app.get('/', (request, response) => {
  response.send({message: 'Hello, world'})
})

app.listen(3000)
```

It's time to test your first API. In the terminal just type:

```bash
node src/index.js
```

You'll notice that as soon as you type `enter` to execute the command, the terminal won't give to you any feedback. To see a feedback on which por
express is running, we need to change the `app.listen(3000)` to:

```javascript
const port = 3000
app.listen(port, () => console.log(`Please, visit: http://localhost:${port}`))
```

Execute the app again to see the difference:
```bash
node src/index.js
```
After that visit: `http://localhost:3000`


<!-- 
* [ ] Using Insomnia to test your API
  * [ ] Insomnia instalation
  * [ ] Sending http requests
-->
